readme.md, before:

# X-Touch Custom Script for Ableton Live 12

This repository contains a modified version of the MackieControl script, adapted specifically for Behringer X-Touch controllers. Originally developed by Arthur Montvidas and further enhanced by Robrecht & posted on github with the contribution of Kik07L, this version adds support for Ableton Live 12 with numerous improvements, including Extender functionality and colored scribble strips.

# We highly recommend downloading the Release version [here](https://github.com/Kik07L/Behringer-X-Touch-for-ableton/releases). The source code [here](https://github.com/Kik07L/Behringer-X-Touch-for-ableton/archive/refs/heads/main.zip) may include untested or beta features that are potentially unstable.
For a stable experience, please use the latest Release. 😄  

---

link of the Ableton forum page to disscuss and get updated about what's happening : https://forum.ableton.com/viewtopic.php?p=1831258#p1831258

## Features

### Colored Scribble Strips
- **Track Color Matching:** Scribble strip colors follow the track colors set in Ableton Live.
  - Hardware limited to 8 basic colors: black, red, yellow, green, blue, magenta, cyan, and white.
  - Automatically calculates the closest match.
- **Black Color Handling:** Black scribble strips are only used if explicitly selected in Live to prevent unreadable text.
- **Grayscale Handling:** All grayscale colors (except black) default to white scribble strips.
- **Inactive Channels:** Tracks beyond your active channels are marked with black scribble strips to indicate inactivity.
- **Plug-In Mode:**
  - Scribble strips are lit in a single color (Cyan) for better readability.
- **Color matching method:** Selected through the new global settings menu.
  - RGB (default) calculates the closest color in RGB space. 
  - Hue attempts to improve color matching by prioritizing hue (light colors will map to their corresponding primary scribble strip color instead of white).
  - Off: no colors (all white).
  - Experimental: press `OPTION + READ/OFF` to briefly see mixed color approximations of the real track colors on the scribble strips.
    ⚠️ Disclaimer: this feature requires rapid alternating between color LEDs, which may or may not cause increased wear – use at your own risk. Avoid if you are sensitive to flickering light.

### Faders correctly show 0dB
- Physical faders recalibrated to be at the zero mark when track volume is 0dB in Live.
- Faders zero point can be finely calibrated if needed.
- Can be disabled (back to original operation) in global settings menu.

### Level Meter Enhancements
- **Clipping Indicators:** Channel strip level meters now show clipping when it occurs.
- **Snappy Meters:** Channel strip level meters now react more quickly to changes in audio.

### Global Solo
- When one or more tracks are soloed, `SOLO` button in Transport Section toggles their solo state on and off simultaneously.
- `CONTROL + SOLO` to toggle in time with track (follows global launch quantization).

### Chains behave as groups
- Press `SELECT` twice on a track that contains a Rack to expand its chains in the Mixer (same behavior as with track groups).
- This way, chain elements like individual drum sounds can be mixed along with the rest of the set.
- Rack chains react just like normal tracks to faders, `MUTE` and `SOLO` buttons and encoders (in Pan and Sends mode).
  - If volume or panning for a device chain is macro mapped, the fader/rotary encoder for that chain will have no effect.
- Limitations: audio metering and audio routing are currently unavailable for chains in Live's API.

### Metronome button blinks in time
- Visual indication of tempo when metronome is enabled.
- On by default, can be disabled through global settings menu.

### Single Send Mode
- Default Sends mode (`SEND`) shows send levels **for all return tracks/return chains on the current track/chain**.
- New Single Send mode (`SEND` x 2) shows send levels **for a single return track/return chain across all tracks/chains**.
- In default Sends mode, either press `SEND` again or `SHIFT + Press rotary encoder` to select the corresponding return track for Single Send mode.
- Press `EQ` or `INST` to move control to the previous/next return track/return chain send levels.
- Scribble strips will turn black for unavailable sends (if the number of global return tracks differs from the number of return chains in a device with chains visible in the mixer).

### Persistent settings
- Global settings are now preserved across sessions.
- Settings can be edited through built-in global settings menu and are saved in options.txt.

### Global settings menu
- `SHIFT + ZOOM`: Open settings menu.
- `UP`, `DOWN`: Browse settings.
- `LEFT`, `RIGHT`: Change setting.
- `JOG WHEEL`: Change setting.
- `SCRUB`: Reset setting to default.
- `ZOOM`: Save and exit.

### Options in global settings menu
- **Color matching method** (RGB, Hue or off, default: RGB).
  - In Hue mode: **white cut-off** (higher = more white scribble strips, default: 0.19).
  - When color matching is off: **turn inactive channels black** (off by default).
- **Function Buttons mode** (see Function Buttons).
- **Metronome blinks in time** (on by default).
- **Indicate tracks muted via solo** by flashing `MUTE` button (off by default).
- **Faders at zero** (on by default)
  - When enabled: **calibrate zero point** (-40...+40)
  - When enabled: **fader control requires finger touch** (on by default)
- **Select track by touching fader** (off by default).
- **Master fader controls Cue/headphones volume** when faders are flipped (off by default).
- **Clock** (Off, On or Short, off by default).
- **Night mode** (off by default).
- **Snappy meters** (on by default).
- **Button layout:** Standard or Overlay (default: Standard).
  - In Standard layout: swap `FLIP` and `GLOBAL VIEW` (select Master channel) buttons (off by default).
- **Auto banking:** X-Touch fader banks follow selected track (off by default).

### Night Mode
- Press all four `MODIFY` buttons (`SHIFT`, `OPTION`, `CONTROL` and `ALT`) simultaneously to toggle Night Mode (or activate in settings menu).
- `MODIFY` section LEDs are permanently lit for enhanced visibility.
- Press any `MODIFY` button to temporarily light up all buttons.

### Macro Mapper
- Quick access to 16 multi-mappable macros via the rotary encoders.
- Place the supplied "X-Touch Macro Mapper" device (in "XTouch/Macro Mapper/" folder) on the Master track as the first (leftmost) device in the chain.
- Map the Max4Live devices in the rack to any function in the project and rename the 16 macro knobs to suit.
- Press and hold `USER` to bring up mappings on rotary encoders temporarily, or `SHIFT + USER` to lock.
  - Quick access through the `USER` button will work with any device that is first in the chain on the Master channel and has "X-Touch" in its name.

### Function Buttons modes
- `SHIFT + F1-F8`: Select mode.
- `SHIFT + F1`: **Off** (leave Functions buttons available for MIDI mapping).
- `SHIFT + F2`: **Record Quantization mode.**
  - `F1-F8` to set quantization (1/4, 1/8, etc.).
  - Press lit button again for no quantization.
- `SHIFT + F3`: **Input Type mode.**
  - `F1-F8` to select current track input type.
  - `ALT + F1-F8` for 9-16.
  - On MIDI track, press lit button again for All Ins.
- `SHIFT + F4`: **Input Channel mode.**
  - `F1-F8` to select current track input channel.
  - `ALT + F1-F8` for 9-16.
  - On MIDI track, press lit button again for All Channels.
- `SHIFT + F7`: **Locator Mode.**
  - Lit `F1-F8` buttons represent locators in Arrangement.
  - Blinking `F1-F8` button shows current playhead location.
  - For locators 9-16, lit/blinking logic is reversed.
  - Press lit button to jump to locator.
  - Press lit button again to delete locator.
  - Press unlit button to add locator.
  - `ALT + F1-F8` for 9-16.
  - Locator name for current section is briefly displayed as playhead moves.
- `SHIFT + F8`: **Macro Mapper Variations mode.**
  - `F1-F8` to store/recall variations on the Macro Mapper device.
  - `OPTION + F1-F8` to delete variation.

### Device Control Lock
- With the rotary encoders assigned to device parameters (`PLUG-IN` > `Press rotary encoder` to select device), press `SHIFT + PLUG-IN` to lock current assignment.
- Once locked, device assignment will no longer be canceled by selecting, soloing, muting or arming other tracks.

### Other improvements and optional features
- **Select track by touching fader** (off by default, can be enabled through settings menu).
- **Indicate track muted via solo** by flashing `MUTE` button (off by default, can be enabled through settings menu).
- **Master fader controls Cue/headphones volume** when faders are flipped (off by default, can be enabled through settings menu).
- Short **messages on Time Display** provide feedback on various actions.
- Double tap track `SELECT` button to reset fader to default value.
- Changing volume by moving fader **requires finger/capacitive touch**.
  - Only available with **Faders at zero** enabled.
  - Can be disabled through global settings menu.

## Button Mappings
### **Encoder Assign Section**
- `TRACK`: Assign encoders to track properties (cycles through Input Type, Input Channel, Output Type, Output Channel, Track Color).
- `PAN/SURROUND`: Assign encoders to track panning.
- `EQ`: Bank left in device control or Single Send mode.
- `SEND`: Assign encoders to track send levels.
  - `SEND`: press again for Single Send mode.
  - Alternatively, `SHIFT + Press rotary encoder`: Single Send mode for selected return track.
- `PLUG-IN`: Assign encoders to track devices.
  - `Press rotary encoder` to select device.
  - `SHIFT + PLUG-IN`: lock current device assigment.
- `INST`: Bank right in device control or Single Send mode.

### **Display Section**
- `DISPLAY`: Switch between audio/instrument and return tracks.
- `SHIFT + SMPTE/BEATS`: Show clock instead of song time/beats. Press again to show clock without seconds.

### **Channel Strip**
- `REC`: Arm track for recording.
  - If "Exclusive" is enabled for arming in Live settings, all other tracks will be de-armed.
  - `CONTROL + REC`: Inverts the exclusive/non-exclusive setting for arming.
- `SHIFT + REC`: Toggle monitoring state (exclusive: **In/Auto**). REC LED blinks when in **In** mode.
  - `SHIFT + CONTROL + REC`: Toggle monitoring state (non-exclusive).
- `SOLO`: Solo track.
  - If "Exclusive" is enabled for soloing in Live settings, all other tracks will be unsoloed.
  - `CONTROL + SOLO`: Inverts the exclusive/non-exclusive setting for soloing.
  - `SHIFT + SOLO`: Adds/removes track to/from previously soloed tracks (track `SOLO` LEDs blinking, see `SOLO` button in Transport Section).
- `MUTE`: Mute track.
- `SELECT`: Select track. Press again to fold/unfold.
  - Parent track of a selected grouped track or chain will blink to indicate where group/chain starts.

### **Gray Section**
- `FLIP`: Swap faders and rotary encoders.
- `GLOBAL VIEW`: Select the Master Track.
  - Enable Flip Reverse in the global settings menu to swap `FLIP` and `GLOBAL VIEW`, so `FLIP` selects the Master Track (consistent with channel strip `SELECT` buttons) and `GLOBAL VIEW` swaps faders and encoders.
- `MIDI TRACKS`: Switch between Session and Arrangement views.
  - `CONTROL + MIDI TRACKS`: Store current view (Session/Arrangement, browser, clip/devices).
  - `SHIFT + MIDI TRACKS`: Recall stored view (Session/Arrangement, browser, clip/devices).
- `INPUTS`: Toggle between clip and device views. LED is on in clip view.
- `AUDIO TRACKS`: Open/close the details view.
- `AUDIO INST`: Open/close the browser.
- `AUX`: Create a new MIDI track.
- `BUSES`: Create a new audio track.
- `OUTPUTS`: Create a new return track.
- `USER`: Press and hold to show Macro Mapper.
  - `SHIFT + USER`: Lock Macro Mapper.

### **Function Section**
- `SHIFT + F1-F8`: Select Function Section mode.
  - `F1`: Disabled (allow `F1-F8` to be MIDI mapped).  
  - `F2`: MIDI Record Quantization (`F1-F8`, press twice for no quantization).
  - `F3`: Current track Input Type (`F1-F8`, press twice for All Ins on MIDI track).
  - `F4`: Current track Input Channel (`F1-F8`, `ALT + F1-F8` for Channels 9-16, press twice for All Channels on MIDI track).
- `OPTION + F1-F8`: Quick select current track Input Type.
- `CONTROL/ALT + F1-F8`: Quick select current track Input Channel (`CONTROL` for Channels 1-8, `ALT` for Channels 9-16).

### **Master Channel Strip**
- `FLIP`: Swap faders and rotary encoders.
  - If enabled in the global settings menu, `Master Fader` controls Cue/Preview volume in flipped state.
- `SHIFT + FLIP`: Select the Master Track. Press again to show Master device chain.

### **Automation Section**
- `READ/OFF`: Re-enable automation.
- `WRITE`: Arm for automation recording.
- `TOUCH`: Toggle Draw mode.
- `LATCH`: Toggle Follow mode.
- `TRIM`: Toggle MIDI arrangement overdub.
- `GROUP`: Expand/collapse selected track (if it is a group or contains chains). LED behavior:
  - ON: Current track is a group or contains chains.
  - Blinking: Current track is within a group or is a chain within a track.

### **Utility Section**
- `SAVE`: Capture MIDI. LED lights up when active.
- `UNDO`: Undo last action.
- `ENTER`: Redo last action.
- `CANCEL`: Return to Arrangement view. LED lights up when enabled.

### **Transport Section**
- `CLICK`: Toggle metronome. LED blinks in time when active.
  - `CONTROL + CLICK`: Tap tempo.
- `SCRUB`: Play selected clip in Session view.
- `MARKER`: Jump to the previous marker.
  - `CONTROL + MARKER`: Create or delete a marker at the current position.
- `NUDGE`: Jump to the next marker.
- `CYCLE`: Toggle loop.
- `DROP`: Toggle punch in.
  - `CONTROL + DROP`: Set loop start at current song time.
- `REPLACE`: Toggle punch out.
  - `CONTROL + REPLACE`: Set loop end at current song time.
- `SOLO`: Lights up when one or more tracks are soloed. Press to toggle all solo states on and off at once (Global Solo function). LED behavior:
  - ON: Tracks soloed, press to unsolo all at once.
  - Blinking: Previously soloed tracks stored, press to restore.
  - OFF: No tracks soloed, press to solo current track.
  - `CONTROL + SOLO`: Toggle solo states in time with song (delayed according to global launch quantization as set in Live).
  - `SHIFT + SOLO`: Reset.

### **Jog Wheel and Navigation Buttons**
- `Rotation`, `UP`, `DOWN`, `LEFT`, `RIGHT`: Move playhead/clip slot selection.
- `SHIFT + Rotation`: Faster movement.
- `ALT + Rotation`: Slower movement.
- `ALT + LEFT`, `ALT + RIGHT`: Select time region.
- `OPTION + Rotation`: Move loop region (faster with `SHIFT`).
- `OPTION + ALT + Rotation`: Move loop end bracket (faster with `SHIFT`).
- `CONTROL + Rotation`: Change tempo.
- `ZOOM BUTTON`: Activate zoom (in Arrangement view).
  - `Rotation`, `LEFT` or `RIGHT`: Zoom in/out.
  - `UP`, `DOWN`: Adjust current track height.
  - `ALT + UP`, `ALT + DOWN`: Adjust all tracks height.
- `ZOOM BUTTON`: Fire selected clip (in Session view).
  - `OPTION + ZOOM BUTTON`: Stop selected clip (in Session view).
  - `ALT + ZOOM BUTTON`: Toggle stop button for selected clip slot (in Session view).
- `SCRUB`: Fire selected scene (in Session view).
  - `OPTION + SCRUB`: Stop all clips (in Session view).

---

## Installation
1. Unzip the downloaded files.
2. Copy the `XTouch` and `XTouchXT` folders to the Remote Scripts folder in your User Library.

- **Windows:** Documents\Ableton\User Library\Remote Scripts
- **Mac:** Music/Ableton/User Library/Remote Scripts

For more info, see the [Ableton Live help page](https://help.ableton.com/hc/en-us/articles/209072009-Installing-third-party-remote-scripts?pk_vid=00fb25b3f17d28b5174887569027d6e6).

---

## Compatibility
- Tested with Ableton Live 12.

---

Feel free to contribute or report any issues! 😊

Commit message:

Manual bank sync
- Press FADER BANK LEFT + RIGHT simultaneously to sync bank position from X-Touch to Live.
- Press CHANNEL LEFT + RIGHT simultaneously to sync bank position from Live (selected track) to X-Touch.
- Changed: auto banking (when enabled in settings) now works without showing Session Box.

readme.md, after:

# X-Touch Custom Script for Ableton Live 12

This repository contains a modified version of the MackieControl script, adapted specifically for Behringer X-Touch controllers. Originally developed by Arthur Montvidas and further enhanced by Robrecht & posted on github with the contribution of Kik07L, this version adds support for Ableton Live 12 with numerous improvements, including Extender functionality and colored scribble strips.

# We highly recommend downloading the Release version [here](https://github.com/Kik07L/Behringer-X-Touch-for-ableton/releases). The source code [here](https://github.com/Kik07L/Behringer-X-Touch-for-ableton/archive/refs/heads/main.zip) may include untested or beta features that are potentially unstable.
For a stable experience, please use the latest Release. 😄  

---

link of the Ableton forum page to disscuss and get updated about what's happening : https://forum.ableton.com/viewtopic.php?p=1831258#p1831258

## Features

### Colored Scribble Strips
- **Track Color Matching:** Scribble strip colors follow the track colors set in Ableton Live.
  - Hardware limited to 8 basic colors: black, red, yellow, green, blue, magenta, cyan, and white.
  - Automatically calculates the closest match.
- **Black Color Handling:** Black scribble strips are only used if explicitly selected in Live to prevent unreadable text.
- **Grayscale Handling:** All grayscale colors (except black) default to white scribble strips.
- **Inactive Channels:** Tracks beyond your active channels are marked with black scribble strips to indicate inactivity.
- **Plug-In Mode:**
  - Scribble strips are lit in a single color (Cyan) for better readability.
- **Color matching method:** Selected through the new global settings menu.
  - RGB (default) calculates the closest color in RGB space. 
  - Hue attempts to improve color matching by prioritizing hue (light colors will map to their corresponding primary scribble strip color instead of white).
  - Off: no colors (all white).
  - Experimental: press `OPTION + READ/OFF` to briefly see mixed color approximations of the real track colors on the scribble strips.
    ⚠️ Disclaimer: this feature requires rapid alternating between color LEDs, which may or may not cause increased wear – use at your own risk. Avoid if you are sensitive to flickering light.

### Faders correctly show 0dB
- Physical faders recalibrated to be at the zero mark when track volume is 0dB in Live.
- Faders zero point can be finely calibrated if needed.
- Can be disabled (back to original operation) in global settings menu.

### Level Meter Enhancements
- **Clipping Indicators:** Channel strip level meters now show clipping when it occurs.
- **Snappy Meters:** Channel strip level meters now react more quickly to changes in audio.

### Global Solo
- When one or more tracks are soloed, `SOLO` button in Transport Section toggles their solo state on and off simultaneously.
- `CONTROL + SOLO` to toggle in time with track (follows global launch quantization).

### Chains behave as groups
- Press `SELECT` twice on a track that contains a Rack to expand its chains in the Mixer (same behavior as with track groups).
- This way, chain elements like individual drum sounds can be mixed along with the rest of the set.
- Rack chains react just like normal tracks to faders, `MUTE` and `SOLO` buttons and encoders (in Pan and Sends mode).
  - If volume or panning for a device chain is macro mapped, the fader/rotary encoder for that chain will have no effect.
- Limitations: audio metering and audio routing are currently unavailable for chains in Live's API.

### Metronome button blinks in time
- Visual indication of tempo when metronome is enabled.
- On by default, can be disabled through global settings menu.

### Single Send Mode
- Default Sends mode (`SEND`) shows send levels **for all return tracks/return chains on the current track/chain**.
- New Single Send mode (`SEND` x 2) shows send levels **for a single return track/return chain across all tracks/chains**.
- In default Sends mode, either press `SEND` again or `SHIFT + Press rotary encoder` to select the corresponding return track for Single Send mode.
- Press `EQ` or `INST` to move control to the previous/next return track/return chain send levels.
- Scribble strips will turn black for unavailable sends (if the number of global return tracks differs from the number of return chains in a device with chains visible in the mixer).

### Persistent settings
- Global settings are now preserved across sessions.
- Settings can be edited through built-in global settings menu and are saved in options.txt.

### Global settings menu
- `SHIFT + ZOOM`: Open settings menu.
- `UP`, `DOWN`: Browse settings.
- `LEFT`, `RIGHT`: Change setting.
- `JOG WHEEL`: Change setting.
- `SCRUB`: Reset setting to default.
- `ZOOM`: Save and exit.

### Options in global settings menu
- **Color matching method** (RGB, Hue or off, default: RGB).
  - In Hue mode: **white cut-off** (higher = more white scribble strips, default: 0.19).
  - When color matching is off: **turn inactive channels black** (off by default).
- **Function Buttons mode** (see Function Buttons).
- **Metronome blinks in time** (on by default).
- **Indicate tracks muted via solo** by flashing `MUTE` button (off by default).
- **Faders at zero** (on by default)
  - When enabled: **calibrate zero point** (-40...+40)
  - When enabled: **fader control requires finger touch** (on by default)
- **Select track by touching fader** (off by default).
- **Master fader controls Cue/headphones volume** when faders are flipped (off by default).
- **Clock** (Off, On or Short, off by default).
- **Night mode** (off by default).
- **Snappy meters** (on by default).
- **Button layout:** Standard or Overlay (default: Standard).
  - In Standard layout: swap `FLIP` and `GLOBAL VIEW` (select Master channel) buttons (off by default).
- **Auto banking:** X-Touch fader banks follow selected track (off by default).
  - Press `FADER BANK LEFT + RIGHT` simultaneously to manually sync bank position from X-Touch to Live.
  - Press `CHANNEL LEFT + RIGHT` simultaneously to manually sync bank position from Live (selected track) to X-Touch.

### Night Mode
- Press all four `MODIFY` buttons (`SHIFT`, `OPTION`, `CONTROL` and `ALT`) simultaneously to toggle Night Mode (or activate in settings menu).
- `MODIFY` section LEDs are permanently lit for enhanced visibility.
- Press any `MODIFY` button to temporarily light up all buttons.

### Macro Mapper
- Quick access to 16 multi-mappable macros via the rotary encoders.
- Place the supplied "X-Touch Macro Mapper" device (in "XTouch/Macro Mapper/" folder) on the Master track as the first (leftmost) device in the chain.
- Map the Max4Live devices in the rack to any function in the project and rename the 16 macro knobs to suit.
- Press and hold `USER` to bring up mappings on rotary encoders temporarily, or `SHIFT + USER` to lock.
  - Quick access through the `USER` button will work with any device that is first in the chain on the Master channel and has "X-Touch" in its name.

### Function Buttons modes
- `SHIFT + F1-F8`: Select mode.
- `SHIFT + F1`: **Off** (leave Functions buttons available for MIDI mapping).
- `SHIFT + F2`: **Record Quantization mode.**
  - `F1-F8` to set quantization (1/4, 1/8, etc.).
  - Press lit button again for no quantization.
- `SHIFT + F3`: **Input Type mode.**
  - `F1-F8` to select current track input type.
  - `ALT + F1-F8` for 9-16.
  - On MIDI track, press lit button again for All Ins.
- `SHIFT + F4`: **Input Channel mode.**
  - `F1-F8` to select current track input channel.
  - `ALT + F1-F8` for 9-16.
  - On MIDI track, press lit button again for All Channels.
- `SHIFT + F7`: **Locator Mode.**
  - Lit `F1-F8` buttons represent locators in Arrangement.
  - Blinking `F1-F8` button shows current playhead location.
  - For locators 9-16, lit/blinking logic is reversed.
  - Press lit button to jump to locator.
  - Press lit button again to delete locator.
  - Press unlit button to add locator.
  - `ALT + F1-F8` for 9-16.
  - Locator name for current section is briefly displayed as playhead moves.
- `SHIFT + F8`: **Macro Mapper Variations mode.**
  - `F1-F8` to store/recall variations on the Macro Mapper device.
  - `OPTION + F1-F8` to delete variation.

### Device Control Lock
- With the rotary encoders assigned to device parameters (`PLUG-IN` > `Press rotary encoder` to select device), press `SHIFT + PLUG-IN` to lock current assignment.
- Once locked, device assignment will no longer be canceled by selecting, soloing, muting or arming other tracks.

### Other improvements and optional features
- **Select track by touching fader** (off by default, can be enabled through settings menu).
- **Indicate track muted via solo** by flashing `MUTE` button (off by default, can be enabled through settings menu).
- **Master fader controls Cue/headphones volume** when faders are flipped (off by default, can be enabled through settings menu).
- Short **messages on Time Display** provide feedback on various actions.
- Double tap track `SELECT` button to reset fader to default value.
- Changing volume by moving fader **requires finger/capacitive touch**.
  - Only available with **Faders at zero** enabled.
  - Can be disabled through global settings menu.

## Button Mappings
### **Encoder Assign Section**
- `TRACK`: Assign encoders to track properties (cycles through Input Type, Input Channel, Output Type, Output Channel, Track Color).
- `PAN/SURROUND`: Assign encoders to track panning.
- `EQ`: Bank left in device control or Single Send mode.
- `SEND`: Assign encoders to track send levels.
  - `SEND`: press again for Single Send mode.
  - Alternatively, `SHIFT + Press rotary encoder`: Single Send mode for selected return track.
- `PLUG-IN`: Assign encoders to track devices.
  - `Press rotary encoder` to select device.
  - `SHIFT + PLUG-IN`: lock current device assigment.
- `INST`: Bank right in device control or Single Send mode.

### **Display Section**
- `DISPLAY`: Switch between audio/instrument and return tracks.
- `SHIFT + SMPTE/BEATS`: Show clock instead of song time/beats. Press again to show clock without seconds.

### **Channel Strip**
- `REC`: Arm track for recording.
  - If "Exclusive" is enabled for arming in Live settings, all other tracks will be de-armed.
  - `CONTROL + REC`: Inverts the exclusive/non-exclusive setting for arming.
- `SHIFT + REC`: Toggle monitoring state (exclusive: **In/Auto**). REC LED blinks when in **In** mode.
  - `SHIFT + CONTROL + REC`: Toggle monitoring state (non-exclusive).
- `SOLO`: Solo track.
  - If "Exclusive" is enabled for soloing in Live settings, all other tracks will be unsoloed.
  - `CONTROL + SOLO`: Inverts the exclusive/non-exclusive setting for soloing.
  - `SHIFT + SOLO`: Adds/removes track to/from previously soloed tracks (track `SOLO` LEDs blinking, see `SOLO` button in Transport Section).
- `MUTE`: Mute track.
- `SELECT`: Select track. Press again to fold/unfold.
  - Parent track of a selected grouped track or chain will blink to indicate where group/chain starts.

### **Gray Section**
- `FLIP`: Swap faders and rotary encoders.
- `GLOBAL VIEW`: Select the Master Track.
  - Enable Flip Reverse in the global settings menu to swap `FLIP` and `GLOBAL VIEW`, so `FLIP` selects the Master Track (consistent with channel strip `SELECT` buttons) and `GLOBAL VIEW` swaps faders and encoders.
- `MIDI TRACKS`: Switch between Session and Arrangement views.
  - `CONTROL + MIDI TRACKS`: Store current view (Session/Arrangement, browser, clip/devices).
  - `SHIFT + MIDI TRACKS`: Recall stored view (Session/Arrangement, browser, clip/devices).
- `INPUTS`: Toggle between clip and device views. LED is on in clip view.
- `AUDIO TRACKS`: Open/close the details view.
- `AUDIO INST`: Open/close the browser.
- `AUX`: Create a new MIDI track.
- `BUSES`: Create a new audio track.
- `OUTPUTS`: Create a new return track.
- `USER`: Press and hold to show Macro Mapper.
  - `SHIFT + USER`: Lock Macro Mapper.

### **Function Section**
- `SHIFT + F1-F8`: Select Function Section mode.
  - `F1`: Disabled (allow `F1-F8` to be MIDI mapped).  
  - `F2`: MIDI Record Quantization (`F1-F8`, press twice for no quantization).
  - `F3`: Current track Input Type (`F1-F8`, press twice for All Ins on MIDI track).
  - `F4`: Current track Input Channel (`F1-F8`, `ALT + F1-F8` for Channels 9-16, press twice for All Channels on MIDI track).
- `OPTION + F1-F8`: Quick select current track Input Type.
- `CONTROL/ALT + F1-F8`: Quick select current track Input Channel (`CONTROL` for Channels 1-8, `ALT` for Channels 9-16).

### **Master Channel Strip**
- `FLIP`: Swap faders and rotary encoders.
  - If enabled in the global settings menu, `Master Fader` controls Cue/Preview volume in flipped state.
- `SHIFT + FLIP`: Select the Master Track. Press again to show Master device chain.

### **Automation Section**
- `READ/OFF`: Re-enable automation.
- `WRITE`: Arm for automation recording.
- `TOUCH`: Toggle Draw mode.
- `LATCH`: Toggle Follow mode.
- `TRIM`: Toggle MIDI arrangement overdub.
- `GROUP`: Expand/collapse selected track (if it is a group or contains chains). LED behavior:
  - ON: Current track is a group or contains chains.
  - Blinking: Current track is within a group or is a chain within a track.

### **Utility Section**
- `SAVE`: Capture MIDI. LED lights up when active.
- `UNDO`: Undo last action.
- `ENTER`: Redo last action.
- `CANCEL`: Return to Arrangement view. LED lights up when enabled.

### **Transport Section**
- `CLICK`: Toggle metronome. LED blinks in time when active.
  - `CONTROL + CLICK`: Tap tempo.
- `SCRUB`: Play selected clip in Session view.
- `MARKER`: Jump to the previous marker.
  - `CONTROL + MARKER`: Create or delete a marker at the current position.
- `NUDGE`: Jump to the next marker.
- `CYCLE`: Toggle loop.
- `DROP`: Toggle punch in.
  - `CONTROL + DROP`: Set loop start at current song time.
- `REPLACE`: Toggle punch out.
  - `CONTROL + REPLACE`: Set loop end at current song time.
- `SOLO`: Lights up when one or more tracks are soloed. Press to toggle all solo states on and off at once (Global Solo function). LED behavior:
  - ON: Tracks soloed, press to unsolo all at once.
  - Blinking: Previously soloed tracks stored, press to restore.
  - OFF: No tracks soloed, press to solo current track.
  - `CONTROL + SOLO`: Toggle solo states in time with song (delayed according to global launch quantization as set in Live).
  - `SHIFT + SOLO`: Reset.

### **Jog Wheel and Navigation Buttons**
- `FADER BANK LEFT/RIGHT`: Move faders by bank.
  - `SHIFT + FADER BANK LEFT/RIGHT`: Jump to first/last bank.
  - `FADER BANK LEFT + RIGHT` simultaneously: Sync bank position from X-Touch to Live.
- `CHANNEL LEFT/RIGHT`: Move faders by channel.
  - `SHIFT + CHANNEL LEFT/RIGHT`: Jump to first/last channel.
  - `CHANNEL LEFT + RIGHT` simultaneously: Sync bank position from Live (selected track) to X-Touch.
- `Rotation`, `UP`, `DOWN`, `LEFT`, `RIGHT`: Move playhead/clip slot selection.
- `SHIFT + Rotation`: Faster movement.
- `ALT + Rotation`: Slower movement.
- `ALT + LEFT`, `ALT + RIGHT`: Select time region.
- `OPTION + Rotation`: Move loop region (faster with `SHIFT`).
- `OPTION + ALT + Rotation`: Move loop end bracket (faster with `SHIFT`).
- `CONTROL + Rotation`: Change tempo.
- `ZOOM BUTTON`: Activate zoom (in Arrangement view).
  - `Rotation`, `LEFT` or `RIGHT`: Zoom in/out.
  - `UP`, `DOWN`: Adjust current track height.
  - `ALT + UP`, `ALT + DOWN`: Adjust all tracks height.
- `ZOOM BUTTON`: Fire selected clip (in Session view).
  - `OPTION + ZOOM BUTTON`: Stop selected clip (in Session view).
  - `ALT + ZOOM BUTTON`: Toggle stop button for selected clip slot (in Session view).
- `SCRUB`: Fire selected scene (in Session view).
  - `OPTION + SCRUB`: Stop all clips (in Session view).

---

## Installation
1. Unzip the downloaded files.
2. Copy the `XTouch` and `XTouchXT` folders to the Remote Scripts folder in your User Library.

- **Windows:** Documents\Ableton\User Library\Remote Scripts
- **Mac:** Music/Ableton/User Library/Remote Scripts

For more info, see the [Ableton Live help page](https://help.ableton.com/hc/en-us/articles/209072009-Installing-third-party-remote-scripts?pk_vid=00fb25b3f17d28b5174887569027d6e6).

---

## Compatibility
- Tested with Ableton Live 12.

---

Feel free to contribute or report any issues! 😊
